# Elvish Is Dead; Long Live Elvish!

In January of 2002, I received an issue of _Muse_ magazine[^muse] whose cover story was titled in an unfamiliar language: _Ma quetelyë [sic] i eldalambë?_[^quetelye]—meaning, I soon discovered, "Do you speak Elvish?" The language was Quenya, invented by J.R.R. Tolkien and used in his epic novel _The Lord of the Rings_, and although the magazine focused on the film adaptation of _The Fellowship of the Ring_ (which had just been released the previous month) I was inspired to read the book. I had attempted the journey into Middle-earth twice before, out of a vague curiosity and a feeling that I was missing out on a cultural touchstone, but this time I had a stronger motivation. If anyone ever asked me _"Ma quetelyë i eldalambë"_, I wanted to respond (in Quenya, of course) "Yes!"

Fast-forward thirteen years, and I still don't know how to say "yes" in Quenya. No one does. It's a paradoxical fact that the Elvish languages, held up by Tolkien and his critics alike as the element that, more than any other, made Middle-earth feel "real", are full of holes and inconsistencies that thwart even trivial attempts to converse in them. During those thirteen years, through many attempts to learn Quenya (and, later, Sindarin, Tolkien's other main Elvish language), I discovered this, and came at last to comprehend that the task I had set for myself was not possible.

But despair not! Before you hit the back button on your browser and give up forever on your dreams of learning Elvish, you should know that this story has a happy ending. I will get there in time. The turning point comes when I realize that I had made a _mistake_, a rather fundamental one, that prevented me from seeing the way forward. But not so hasty! First, let me describe what I was actually doing for those thirteen years that I was trying and failing to learn Tolkien's languages.

It certainly seemed *possible*, at the beginning at any rate, to learn Quenya and Sindarin. To be sure, there were missing pieces of the puzzle, but the authors of the courses I was using seemed to have filled in the blanks pretty well. My lack of progress was due to no fault in my instructors' teaching ability, nor to lack of aptitude on my part. It was due to the fact that I kept giving up, and later beginning again, over and over. I would learn a bit of Elvish, try to use it in a sentence or maybe a longer composition, and become increasingly frustrated by it. Although my instructors and fellow students reassured me that my grammar was correct, the sentences I produced didn't *feel* right. They were clumsy and ugly and entirely different from the passages I loved from _The Lord of the Rings_, despite being built of words drawn from dictionaries that cited Tolkien's works. And so the vicissitudes of my studies led me from aspiration to frustration and back again, but always toward the conclusion that the languages were not actually as I had first thought them to be; that I had ascribed to them a type of beauty that they did not in fact possess.

In between bouts of learning Sindarin and Quenya (I alternated between the two, with the changing winds of my aesthetic preference), I struck out on my own, sketching new invented languages and dabbling in many real-world ones. I always came back to Tolkien's languages, though. My obstinance, together with the evidence of the Elvish phrases in _The Lord of the Rings_, made me unwilling to believe that my first impressions had been false. After many years of this cycle, I convinced myself that the languages I loved were illusions and that there was no real purpose to learning them anyway, and put my studies on the shelf indefinitely.

The "indefinite" period turned out only to last about a year, for Tolkien's languages again caught my attention from a slightly different angle. I had bought a copy of David Salo's _A Gateway to Sindarin_ after skimming the preview on Google and discovering, to my great delight, that it contained the complete sequence of sound changes between Common Eldarin and Sindarin. I had long known that the secret ingredient in Tolkien's linguistic concoctions was *time*: he did not simply make up Quenya or Sindarin words at random, but created words in a common ancestor of both languages, according to strict derivational rules. He would then simulate, also according to regular rules, the development of those words through the entire history of Elvish speech, until he arrived at the forms that Frodo might have heard in Rivendell or Lothlórien. It was through these sound shifts that the rich and unique flavor of each language was achieved. Seeing them spelled out with mathematical clarity in Salo's book, I saw a clear path before me: I would use Salo's work to construct a computer program that would carry out Tolkien's simulation of language change on a massive scale. My program would derive not only the Sindarin and Quenya forms of each primitive root, but all the intermediate forms as well, checking them for correctness against every word of every dialect of Elvish that Tolkien ever penned. The result would be a computational model of the Eldarin language family, inescapably consistent and demonstrably faithful to Tolkien's works, that would unite all of the disparate data and make them one. _One program to bring them all and in the darkness bind them._ I felt certain that such a model was achievable, and also certain that it would yield the most accurate possible description of Tolkien's languages.

I did not realize the hubris of this endeavor for several hours. One of the first sources I combed for ancient Eldarin words was _The Etymologies_, a posthumously-published glossary describing the changes wrought upon hundreds of Elvish words by the long ages of Middle-earth. For the sake of thoroughness, I read Christopher Tolkien's introduction to it, and was a bit taken aback by his statement that "finality and a system fixed at every point were not [J.R.R. Tolkien's] underlying aim". Somewhat disheartened, I read on, and my discouragement grew to horror. I learned that within the manuscript of the _Etymologies_—the ultimate source for most of the Elvish words I had ever learned—there are layers upon layers of struck-out entries and revisions, penciled notes, cryptic jottings, illegible words, and a cornucopia of spelling conventions. Only then did I begin to understand that the data for Quenya and Sindarin are not merely fragmentary, they are not even self-consistent. Tolkien's languages were characterized, in the real world as in the fictional one, by constant and rapid change. And that means they are dead, more dead than the most scantily-documented dead languages of our own earth, because even in the mind of their creator they never took a fixed and final form.

_But wait,_ I said to myself. _Isn't consistency of form one of the lauded characteristics of the elvish in_ The Lord of the Rings_? And don't the Quenya and Sindarin words from Tolkien's works show clear and systematic relationships to each other? If Tolkien was able to settle on a consistent form of his languages long enough to write_ The Lord of the Rings_, maybe the situation's not as bad as it seems._ And so I continued to write my program and search the _Etymologies_ for words to put into it. I made reasonable progress, though my messianic delusions were thoroughly quenched. At the same time, I decided to do more research on Tolkien's life and creative process, and through this I eventually discovered that the situation was not, in fact, very bad at all.

But all in due time. First we must come to the turning-point of the story: my discovery of the *mistake*. For a long time I had worked at learning Elvish, though it was a casual sort of work, undertaken in moments of boredom and solitude. Writing the program was a different beast entirely. It consumed all of my time, to the point where I had to seriously question why I was making the effort. Previously I had told myself that I was learning Elvish in order to use it in poetry or in my own private writings—an explanation that I maintained despite having produced exactly zero lines of text in any Elvish language. This seemed now like a transparent rationalization for an activity that was really not rational. I knew in my heart, and finally admitted to myself, that even if my program miraculously derived a complete grammar of every Elvish language, and the ghost of J.R.R. Tolkien himself appeared in a cloud of lembas crumbs and blessed it with a silver wand, my use for the languages would end there. I had never really wanted to write so much as a sentence in Elvish; I merely liked the idea of being able to.

It appeared plain to me that Tolkien also liked the idea—in a letter he wrote, "I should have preferred to write in 'Elvish'. But, of course, such a work as _The Lord of the Rings_ has been edited and only as much 'language' has been left in as I thought would be stomached by readers." (_Letters_ #165) And yet, despite this clear statement, Tolkien seems to have edited very little "language" from the book. Carl Hostetter notes that "judging from the surviving manuscripts and typescripts [. . .] more Elvish was put into the book in the course of rewriting than had originally been in it. It may likewise be noted that if Tolkien ever made any attempt at composing Elvish narrative for his novel, it has apparently not survived." ("Elvish As She Is Spoke" p. 233) By all accounts, then, examples of Elvish prose by Tolkien's hand are as thin on the ground as monkeys in France.[^monkeys] [^kingsletter] Why, I wondered, would Tolkien labor his entire life over his languages, and yet hardly ever use them, except to derive names and write a very few poems?

I did not have to wonder very long. For a resolution to the paradox, the weary researcher need look no further than the same letter cited above, wherein Tolkien writes,

<!-- The authorities of the university might well consider it an abberation of an elderly professor of philology to write a publish fairy stories and romances, and call it a 'hobby', pardonable because it has been (suprisingly to me as much as to anyone) successfully. But it is not a 'hobby', in the sense of something quite different from one's work, taken up as a relief-outlet. The invention of languages is the foundation.-->

> [. . .] the remark about 'philology' was intended to allude to what is I think a primary 'fact' about my work, that it is all of a piece, and *fundamentally linguistic* in inspiration. [. . .] The 'stories' were made rather to provide a world for the languages than the reverse. To me a name comes first and the story follows.<cite>_Letters_ #165</cite>

With this "primary fact" in mind, I began to understand why Tolkien's languages play such an integral and yet limited role in his literature. It seems that regardless of what language Tolkien would have "preferred" to write in, the Elvish tongues were not able to sustain long prose texts, and Tolkien could not simply generate more "language" at will as his story demanded. To do so would be contrary to his actual creative process, in which the story was secondary and subservient to the language that inspired it. A word invented to serve a text would be a poor, lifeless thing. And, (as I thought clear from my inability to produce satisfactory Elvish sentences) a word pressed into service by the needs of a text is little better. This, then, was my *mistake*: I had insisted on trying to *use* Tolkien's languages, when they were never meant to be used, and this had led to my perennial dissatisfaction with them. Once I realized this, the way forward became clear to me.

Well, clear<em>er</em>, anyway. I still had to figure out how one could appreciate a language *as language* (that is, as meaning and structure, not just a sequence of pretty sounds) without actually using it for anything. Carl Hostetter's article _Elvish As She Is Spoke_ finally clarified the matter for me. I did not have to forgo use of the Elvish languages entirely. Rather, instead of deciding on what I wanted to say and then writing it down in Elvish, I could examine the use of Elvish in Tolkien's works and build phrases and sentences from the patterns evidenced there. Lest the difference between the two procedures remain unclear, I should point out that the latter approach tends to produce sentences that *might conceivably be uttered by a character from Tolkien's mythos*, not merely ones that are "grammatical" according to some non-Tolkien person's analysis. And this recalls a central thesis of Tolkien's work: that language and mythology are inextricably intertwined. You cannot have Middle-earth without Elvish, nor Elvish without Middle-earth. Remove the language from the mythos and it withers and dies.

---

My story is now fully told, up to the point where I started making the present version of this website. My aim here, as you can probably guess, is not to present a completed grammar of any of Tolkien's languages. I hope merely to make the enjoyment of Sindarin accessible to any lover of Tolkien's works. As I have hopefully made clear, this cannot really be done by creating a comprehensive course of lessons in the language—such a course, by attempting to make Sindarin as expressive as English or any other living language, will inevitably stray towards non-Tolkien examples. As Carl Hostetter points out in "Elvish As She Is Spoke", this is a serious fault. Using made-up examples to teach Tolkien's languages tends to obscure what Tolkien actually wrote, leading to circular reasoning (e.g. arguing for the "correctness" of a particular construction based on non-Tolkien examples) and translations of ideas that are foreign to Tolkien's mythology.

So a traditional language course is not my aim. Instead, I want to attempt something subtly but significantly different: rather than have the primary question be "How do you say X in Elvish?", I want to first ask "What can we say in Elvish, based on the examples from Tolkien's works?" This approach is likelier to yield a description of Sindarin that is true to Tolkien's intentions. The language described in this way will be sparse, but still expressive. Ultimately, if you read all the articles on this site, you will not be able to speak Sindarin the way you currently speak English, but you _will_ be able to speak Sindarin the way Gandalf speaks it in _The Lord of the Rings_, and that is perhaps better.

_Cuio i lam edhellen anann!_

—Ben Christel, November 2015

[Back to Index](index.html)

*For other perspectives on whether it is possible to "learn Elvish" and what that even means, please see:*

- [_Elvish As She Is Spoke_ (by Carl Hostetter, PDF download)](http://www.elvish.org/articles/EASIS.pdf)
- ["Tolkien's Secret Vice" (by Helge Fauskanger of _Ardalambion_)](http://folk.uib.no/hnohf/vice.htm)
- ["So you want to learn Elvish?" (by Thorsten Renk of _Parma Tyelpelassiva_)](http://www.science-and-fiction.org/elvish/learn_elvish.html)

[^muse]: http://shop.cricketmedia.com/muse/lord-of-the-rings.html
[^quetelye]: As best as I can tell, this should be _quetilyë_.
[^monkeys]: For more on the disposition of monkeys with respect to France, as well as the perils of learning a language from inauthentic examples, see: [Eddie Izzard: Dressed to Kill](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x1sQkEfAdfY).
[^kingsletter]: The longest known example of Sindarin prose, the King's Letter, was written for an epilogue to _The Lord of the Rings_, but not published until after Tolkien's death.
